Add first tutorial lessons (#484)
crystal-lang/crystal-book: docs/tutorials/01_basics/05_control_flow.md

# Control Flow

## Primitive Types

> ### Nil

Reviewer: A note regarding nil not been a value of String and other reference types will make sense here.

As a motivational example we could use finding the occurrence of a string inside another, which could return nil when not present. This could replace the car analogy.

The most simplistic type is `Nil`. It has only a single value: `nil` and represents
the absence of an actual value. If you ask which car occupies a parking spot, and
no car is parking there, the answer is `nil`.

### Bool

The `Bool` type has just two possible values: `true` and `false` which represent the
truth values of logic and Boolean algebra.

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
p! true, false
```

[Boolean values](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_data_type) are particularly useful for
managing control flow in a program.

## Boolean Algebra

The following example shows operators for implementing [boolean algebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_algebra) with
boolean values:

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
a = true
b = false

p! a && b, # conjunction (AND)
   a || b, # disjunction (OR)
   !a,     # negation (NOT)
   a != b, # inequivalence (XOR)
   a == b  # equivalence
```

You can try flicking the values of `a` and `b` to see the operator behaviour for different input values.

### Truthiness

Boolean algebra however is not only defined for boolean types proper. All values have an implicit truthiness: `nil`, `false`

> and null pointers (just for completeness, we cover that later) are *falsey*. Any other value is *truthy*.

Reviewer: We could add 

> Note: 0 is a truthy value.

Let's replace `true` and `false` in the above example with other values, for example `"foo"` and `nil`.

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
a = "foo"
b = nil

p! a && b, # conjunction (AND)
   a || b, # disjunction (OR)
   !a,     # negation (NOT)
   a != b, # inequivalence (XOR)
   a == b  # equivalence
```

The `AND` and `OR` operators return the first operand value matching the operator's truthiness.

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
p! "foo" && nil,
   "foo" && false,
   false || "foo",
   "bar" || "foo"
```

The `NOT`, `XOR` and equivalence operators always return a `Bool` value (`true` or `false`).

## Control Flow

Controlling the flow of a program means to take different paths based on conditions.
Up until now, every program in this tutorial has been a sequential series of expressions.
Now this is going to change.

### Conditionals

A conditional clause puts a branch of code behind a gate that only opens if the condition is met.

> In a most basic form it consists of a keyword `if` followed by an expression serving as condition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the most basic form it consists of a keyword `if` followed by an expression serving as the condition.
```

All subsequent expressions are part of the branch until it closes with the keyword `end`.

Per convention, we indent nested branches by two spaces.

The following example prints the message only if it meets the condition to start with `Hello`.

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Hello World"

if message.starts_with?("Hello")
  puts "Hello to you, too!"
end
```

!!! note
    Technically, this program still runs in a predefined order. The fixed message always matches and makes the condition truthy.
    But let's assume we don't define the value of the message in the source code. It could just as well come from user input,
    for example a chat client.

If the message has a value that does not start with `Hello`, the conditional branch skips and the program prints nothing.

The condition expression can be more complex. With [boolean algebra](#boolean-algebra) we can construct a condition that accepts either `Hello`
or `Hi`:

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Hello World"

if message.starts_with?("Hello") || message.starts_with?("Hi")
  puts "Hey there!"
end
```

Let's turn the condition around: Only print the message if it does *not*  start with `Hello`.

> That's just a minor deviation from the previous example: We can use the negation operator (`!`) to turn the condition
> into the opposite.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That's just a minor deviation from the previous example: We can use the negation operator (`!`) to turn the condition
into the opposite expression.
```

# Control Flow

## Primitive Types

### Nil

The most simplistic type is `Nil`. It has only a single value: `nil` and represents
the absence of an actual value.

Remember [`String#index` from last lesson](./04_strings.md#indexing-substrings)?
It returns `nil` if the substring does not exist in the search string. It has no index,
so the index position is absent.

### Bool

The `Bool` type has just two possible values: `true` and `false` which represent the
truth values of logic and Boolean algebra.

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
p! true, false
```

[Boolean values](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_data_type) are particularly useful for
managing control flow in a program.

## Boolean Algebra

The following example shows operators for implementing [boolean algebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_algebra) with
boolean values:

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
a = true
b = false

p! a && b, # conjunction (AND)
   a || b, # disjunction (OR)
   !a,     # negation (NOT)
   a != b, # inequivalence (XOR)
   a == b  # equivalence
```

You can try flicking the values of `a` and `b` to see the operator behaviour for different input values.

### Truthiness

> Boolean algebra however is not only defined for boolean types proper. All values have an implicit truthiness: `nil`, `false`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Boolean algebra isn't limited to just boolean types, though. All values have an implicit truthiness: `nil`, `false`,
```

and null pointers (just for completeness, we cover that later) are *falsey*. Any other value (including `0`) is *truthy*.

Let's replace `true` and `false` in the above example with other values, for example `"foo"` and `nil`.

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
a = "foo"
b = nil

p! a && b, # conjunction (AND)
   a || b, # disjunction (OR)
   !a,     # negation (NOT)
   a != b, # inequivalence (XOR)
   a == b  # equivalence
```

The `AND` and `OR` operators return the first operand value matching the operator's truthiness.

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
p! "foo" && nil,
   "foo" && false,
   false || "foo",
   "bar" || "foo"
```

The `NOT`, `XOR` and equivalence operators always return a `Bool` value (`true` or `false`).

## Control Flow

> Controlling the flow of a program means to take different paths based on conditions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Controlling the flow of a program means taking different paths based on conditions.
```

or `Hi`:

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Hello World"

if message.starts_with?("Hello") || message.starts_with?("Hi")
  puts "Hey there!"
end
```

Let's turn the condition around: Only print the message if it does *not*  start with `Hello`.
That's just a minor deviation from the previous example: We can use the negation operator (`!`) to turn the condition
into the opposite expression.

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Hello World"

if !message.starts_with?("Hello")
  puts "I didn't understand that."
end
```

An alternative is to replace `if` with the keyword `unless` which expects just the opposite truthiness. `unless x` is equivalent to `if !x`.

### Else

Let's refine our program and react in both cases, whether the message meets the condition or not.

We can do this as two separate conditionals with negated conditions:

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Hello World"

if message.starts_with?("Hello")
  puts "Hello to you, too!"
end

if !message.starts_with?("Hello")
  puts "I didn't understand that."
end
```

This works but there are two drawbacks: The condition expression `message.starts_with?("Hello")` evaluates twice, which is inefficient.

> Later, if we change the condition in one place (maybe allowing `Hi` as well), we might forget changing the other one as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Later, if we change the condition in one place (maybe allowing `Hi` as well), we might forget to change the other one as well.
```

# Control Flow

## Primitive Types

### Nil

The most simplistic type is `Nil`. It has only a single value: `nil` and represents
the absence of an actual value. If you ask which car occupies a parking spot, and
no car is parking there, the answer is `nil`.

### Bool

The `Bool` type has just two possible values: `true` and `false` which represent the
truth values of logic and Boolean algebra.

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
p! true, false
```

[Boolean values](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_data_type) are particularly useful for
managing control flow in a program.

## Boolean Algebra

The following example shows operators for implementing [boolean algebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_algebra) with
boolean values:

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
a = true
b = false

p! a && b, # AND
   a || b, # OR
   !a,     # NOT

>    a != b, # XOR

Reviewer 4: Technically `^` is the XOR operator, though that's a bitwise operator.  `!=` works, but that's usually interpreted as "not equals", which, while accurate, seems strange.  If people search the docs for XOR, they're going to find `^`

Author: Yeah, I didn't want to bring bitwise operators into the picture at this point, because it's another concept and not relevant for boolean respective truthy/falsey. Not sure what the best thing to do here. Maybe keep `!=` and comment it as `inequality (=XOR)`?

Reviewer 4: Yeah that seems like a nice way to put it.

p! a && b, # AND
   a || b, # OR
   !a,     # NOT
   a != b, # inequivalence (XOR)
   a == b  # equivalence
```

The `AND` and `OR` operators return the first operand value matching the operator's truthiness.

```{.crystal, .crystal-play}
p! "foo" && nil,
   "foo" && false,
   false || "foo",
   "bar" || "foo"
```

The `NOT`, `XOR` and equivalence operators always return a `Bool` value (`true` or `false`).

## Control Flow

Controlling the flow of a program means to take different paths based on conditions.
Up until now, every program in this tutorial has been a sequential series of expressions.
Now this is going to change.

### Conditionals

A conditional clause puts a branch of code behind a gate that only opens if the condition is met.

In a most basic form it consists of a keyword `if` followed by an expression serving as condition.
The condition is met when the return value of the expression is *truthy*.

> All subsequent expressions are part of the branch until closes with the keyword `end`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All subsequent expressions are part of the branch until closed with the keyword `end`.
```

> Per convention we indent nested branches by two spaces.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Per convention, we indent nested branches by two spaces.
```

The following example prints the message only if it meets the condition to start with `Hello`.

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Hello World"

if message.starts_with?("Hello")
  puts "Hello to you, too!"
end
```

!!! note
    Technically, this program still runs in a predefined order. The fixed message always matches and makes the condition truthy.
    But let's assume we don't define the value of the message in the source code. It could just as well come from user input,
    for example a chat client.

If the message has a value that does not start with `Hello`, the conditional branch skips and the program prints nothing.

> The condition expression can be more complex. With boolean algebra we can construct a condition that accepts either `Hello`

Reviewer 4: link the to the Boolean Algebra section of the tutorial?

or `Hi`:

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Hello World"

if message.starts_with?("Hello") || message.starts_with?("Hi")
  puts "Hey there!"
end
```

Let's turn the condition around: Only print the message if it does *not*  start with `Hello`.
That's just a minor deviation from the previous example: We can use the negation operator (`!`) to turn the condition
into the opposite.

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Hello World"

if !message.starts_with?("Hello")
  puts "I didn't understand that."
end
```

An alternative is to replace `if` with the keyword `unless` which expects just the opposite truthiness. `unless x` is equivalent to `if !x`.

### Else

Let's refine our program and react in both cases, whether the message meets the condition or not.

We can do this as two separate conditionals with negated conditions:

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Hello World"

if message.starts_with?("Hello")
  puts "Hello to you, too!"
end

if !message.starts_with?("Hello")
  puts "I didn't understand that."
end
```

> This works but there are two drawbacks: The condition expression `message.starts_with?("Hello")` evaluates twice, that's inefficient.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This works but there are two drawbacks: The condition expression `message.starts_with?("Hello")` evaluates twice, which is inefficient.
```

> And if we later change the condition in one place (maybe allow `Hi` as well), we might forget changing the other one as well.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Later, if we change the condition in one place (maybe allowing `Hi` as well), we might forget changing the other one as well.
```

A conditional can have multiple branches. The alternate branch is indicated by the keyword `else`. It executes if the condition is not met.

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Hello World"

if message.starts_with?("Hello")
  puts "Hello to you, too!"
else
  puts "I didn't understand that."
end
```

### More branches

Our program only reacts to `Hello`, but we want more interaction. Let's add a branch to respond to `Bye` as well.
We can have branches for different conditions in the same conditional. It's like an `else` with another
integrated `if`. Hence the keyword is `elsif`:

```{.crystal .crystal-play}
message = "Bye World"

if message.starts_with?("Hello")
  puts "Hello to you, too!"
elsif message.starts_with?("Bye")
  puts "See you later!"
else
  puts "I didn't understand that."
end
```

The `else` branch still only executes if neither of the previous conditions is met. It can always be omitted, though.

Note that the different branches are mutually exclusive and conditions evaluate from top to bottom.
In the above example that doesn't matter because both conditions can't be truthy at the same time (the message can't start with both `Hello` and `Bye`).

> But we can add an alternative condition that is not exclusive to demonstrate this:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, we can add an alternative condition that is not exclusive to demonstrate this:
```
